Fiscal Federalism and Service Delivery in Nigeria: The Role of States and Local Governments
Introduction 1. The relative roles of the three tiers of government—the federal government, the state governments, and the local government authorities (LGAs)—in public service delivery has emerged as one of the most important topics of open and vigorous debate in the new democratic climate in Nigeria. There have been increasing calls for intergovernmental fiscal relations to be reassessed in light of a widespread belief that although the states and LGAs are assigned primary responsibility for the delivery of basic public services, they are not equipped with adequate revenue resources to fulfill their expenditure obligations because the bulk of government revenues is retained by the federal government. The discussion is overwhelmingly centered around the revenue sharing formula that allocates resources from the Federation Account amongst the three tiers of government—currently 48.5 percent of the resources are transferred to the federal government, 24 percent to the state governments, and 20 percent to the LGAs.1 The subnational tiers of government are now demanding that their respective shares be substantially increased. 2. However, there is palpable lack of discussion around whether the current practice of assuming expenditure responsibility and undertaking its implementation is such that a mere shift in resource allocation will achieve the desired objective of delivering better services to the majority of Nigerians. A real issue at stake, which has not received much attention to date, is how effectively do the different tiers of government use their existing resources to perform their functions. In fact, it may be argued that in the context of the Nigerian economy, states and LGAs receive substantial amount of resources, with their total revenues amounting on average to over 5 percent of GDP between 1990 and 1999, and over 10 percent of GDP after the oil price increase in 1999. This report will focus on how the federal system actually works in delivering basic services, and whether there is scope to realign responsibilities—both financial and managerial—to improve accountability and performance. The analysis will seek to provide some informed speculation on what could be expected in terms of outcomes if revenue shares were changed without any reassessment of the sharing of expenditure responsibilities. Thus, it aims to contribute to the process of national dialogue in the country to reach an agreement on which tier is best suited to undertake what expenditure responsibilities and how these should be financed. 3. The analysis will draw upon fieldwork undertaken in 6 states and 12 LGAs to determine the impact of the federal arrangements on basic service delivery in four key areas—primary education, primary health care, potable water and sanitation, and local roads linking communities to schools, health facilities, markets etc.—all of which are consistently identified by the poor in consultation exercises as among the most important services for their well-being.2 These are also services for which primary responsibility is assigned to the states and local governments, and hence suitable areas to study how the federal system works in practice, and what institutional arrangements would enable better performance in the delivery of these essential services. The general insights gained from this exercise is therefore applicable to other sectors and services. Historical Context Current structure of fiscal federalism in Nigeria—a legacy of military rule 4. A brief tour through the history of Nigerian federalism reveals sharp turning points in federal and regional fiscal relations, based alternately on principles of derivation, national interest, and the centripetal forces of military governments3 . With the adoption of a federal constitution in 1954, Nigeria provided fiscal autonomy to its three regions both over expenditure decisions and over a local revenue base (consisting primarily of mining rents, personal income tax, and receipts from licenses). Centrally collected revenues, primarily from export, import and excise duties, was distributed to the regions according to the derivation principle. However, after independence in 1960, the derivation principle was modified in the interest of national unity, and the federal system of government began to be used to accommodate the diverse social and political interests of a multiethnic state. 5. Since 1966, under successive military regimes, revenue administration and collection became increasingly centralized, and regional allocation was engineered at the discretion of the military government. Simultaneously, expenditure responsibilities and government functions also became centralized, with the federal government assuming the role of the engine of social and economic development. Furthermore, it is widely believed (see Bach, 19894 ) that the federal system began to be perversely used to distribute national resources in a wasteful manner, through the creation of new states and local governments along ethnic and political lines, without regard for economic viability. Nigeria’s federal units grew from three to four regions during 1960-6, and then to 12 states by 1967. In 1976, local governments became recognized as the third tier of government, entitled to statutory allocations from both federal and state governments, and seven additional states were created bringing the total number to 19. Over the decade of the ‘90s this number has almost doubled to the current number of 36 states, and 774 local governments, all of which were created under military rule.